February 2024 - Version 2.0

# Purpose

To ensure that all public metadata submitted to Central EGA (CEGA) for a
Federated EGA (FEGA) study is correct and does not contain any
personally identifiable or sensitive information.This information is
displayed on the EGA website and is searchable by users to enable data
discovery. The FEGA Helpdesk must conduct a metadata review prior to
releasing the study by using the FEGA Helpdesk Portal. After this review
has been successfully completed, the FEGA Helpdesk can release the study
with previous approval from the authorised submitter.

# Scope

<span class="mark">This SOP describes how FEGA Helpdesk shall complete a
metadata review for sequencing datasets submitted to CEGA by the FEGA
Submitter Portal (</span>https://submission.{fega-node}.ega-archive.org
<span class="mark">) as part of an FEGA study and is required before the
study is released.</span>

# Procedure

**<span class="mark">FEGA NODE:</span>**

***<span class="mark">Note: This SOP must only be followed when directly
instructed to release a study or dataset by the authorised
submitter.</span>***

<span class="mark">Steps to complete by the FEGA node **before**
checking the metadata and releasing the study</span>

1.  <span class="mark">Obtain the name of the submission from the
    submitter for the study that they want to release.</span>

2.  <span class="mark">Verify that the data files have been archived
    correctly.</span>

3.  <span class="mark">Follow this SOP to check the metadata through the
    FEGA Helpdesk Portal and generate the EGA accession IDs ( SOP:
    [<u>Validate a
    submission</u>](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1N3trvIQZ_4_1I2LmjZnGYMdgBevjzp4OdIwGX3EFfzs/edit))  
    </span>

<span class="mark">1. Pre-release check of Study, DAC, and Dataset
descriptions</span>

*<span class="mark">Note: Each FEGA node must have their own list of
items to check. For example, the FEGA node might want to check that
sample metadata does not contain any personally identifiable
information. Checklists might differ between different FEGA nodes. **The
FEGA node’s checklist is the one that must be reviewed in this
step.**</span>*

<span class="mark">**Metadata checks include**:</span>

- <span class="mark">**Study title** should be no more than 30 words and
  make sense to the user.</span>

- <span class="mark">**Study description** should be 3-5 sentences and
  should provide further details about the study (why, how,
  what).</span>

- <span class="mark">**Dataset title** should be no more than 30 words
  and should make sense to the user.</span>

- <span class="mark">**Dataset description** should be 2-4 sentences and
  should provide further unique details about the specific dataset (why,
  how, what).</span>

- <span class="mark">**Sample** **report** with public information in
  the metadata API and a sample count (equal to the number of
  rows).</span>

  - <span class="mark">For example, view public sample attributes given
    a Study Accession using the following (replace EGAS number with the
    study of interest):
    [<u>https://ega-archive.org/metadata/v2/samples?queryBy=study&queryId=EGAS00001002472</u>](https://ega-archive.org/metadata/v2/samples?queryBy=study&queryId=EGAS00001002472)</span>

- <span class="mark">**File** **report** with: number of files, file
  name, file type and check if there’s any phenotypic file.</span>

*<span class="mark">Note: Before accepting the submission to generate
the EGA accession IDs, the FEGA Helpdesk has to either approve the DAC
registration, or verify the following information of an already
registered DAC:</span>*

- <span class="mark">**Email address of DAC** must be valid and
  institutional.</span>

<span class="mark">**DAC main contact** must be specified for the DAC.
This can be checked by using the EGA metadata API, e.g.:
<https://ega-archive.org/metadata/v2/dacs/EGAC00001000205></span>

2\. After the check has been completed and everything is correct, the
FEGA node approves the submission to generate the EGA accession IDs for
the submission

3\. Notify the user (If necessary) that the check was completed
successfully and the Study and Dataset IDs were generated and the study
can be now released. Check with the user for a release date.

**<span class="mark">Release Study</span>**

1.  <span class="mark">Follow the following SOP to Release the requested
    study and dataset.</span>

2.  <span class="mark">Notify the DAC/authorised submitter that their
    study has been released and is available to view on the EGA
    website.</span>
